---
title: Templates in MC
layout: post
categories: [jekyll, linux]
tags: [midnightcommander, templates, writing]
---

Now this is clever, and not a capability I had previously been aware of. You can use `Midnight Commander` (mc) to create templates.

<!--more-->

I recently happened upon this 
[article](http://www.linuxcommand.org/lc3_adv_mc.php){:target="_blank"}, which explains the 
process and which I have found very useful when writing posts like this one. 

I create posts within a Jekyll framework, and each post needs to begin with its `frontmatter`. 
This website is not the only one I curate; the requisite frontmatter can be different from 
site to site and I can't always remember what information is required for posts made in those 
different sites. To get around that problem, I have created simple templates specific to the 
requirements of each website. 

Posts are stored (not unsurprisingly) in the folder `_posts`. Within that folder I created the file `.mc.menu`. The file consists of the following;

```
# Create a new post

Create a new post
  { echo "---"
  echo "  title: "
  echo "  layout: post"
  echo "  categories: jekyll, linux, markdown, security"
  echo "  tags: [  ] "
  echo "---"
  echo ; } > new-post.md
```

I have listed all of the `category` types I use on this site. I can delete the ones not relevant 
to the article when I edit the post.


Having saved the file, from within MC make your way to the `_posts` folder. Select `F2`, and a 
dialogue box will pop up, giving you the option to `Create a new post`. Hit enter, and a file 
called `new-post.md` will appear in the `_posts` folder. Select it and change the file name to 
something more meaningful. Open the file, and within the frontmatter, select the relevant 
category, add the title and tags and then begin creating your masterpiece. 

Yes, very clever indeed! 
