---
layout: post
title: Workflow
date: 2021-05-25
categories: jekyll
tags: [github, workflow ]
excerpt:
  There surely had to be some way to build ones site using gems not supported by Github prior to pushing the static site to Github-Pages.
---

The frustration with Github Pages is that there are only a few gems Github allow to be used when building ones web site. To quote from Jekyll's site;

> When building a Jekyll site with GitHub Pages, the standard flow is restricted for security reasons and to make it simpler to get a site setup.

For example, whilst `jekyll-paginate` is on the Github white-list, the altogether more flexible `jekyll-paginate-v2` is not. I reasoned there surely had to be some way to build ones site using gems not supported by Github prior to pushing the static site to Github-Pages. It transpires such a facility does exist, and it is called `GitHub Actions`.

Full instructions for installing Github Actions can be found [HERE](https://jekyllrb.com/docs/continuous-integration/github-actions/){:target="_blank"}.

As per the instructions before beginning this process, I created a new repository entitled *username*.github.io.

There is no gem associated with `github-actions`. We simply begin with the `.yml` file.

### The Workflow YML File
Begin by creating a folder `.github/workflows/`, and then within it create the document `github-pages.yml`;

```yml
name: Build and deploy Jekyll site to GitHub Pages

on:
  push:
    branches:
      - main # or master before October 2020

jobs:
  github-pages:
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    steps:
      - uses: actions/checkout@v2
      - uses: actions/cache@v2
        with:
          path: vendor/bundle
          key: {% raw %}${{ runner.os }}-gems-${{ hashFiles('**/Gemfile') }}
          restore-keys: |
            ${{ runner.os }}-gems-{% endraw %}
      - uses: helaili/jekyll-action@2.0.5    # Choose any one of the Jekyll Actions
        with:                                # Some relative inputs of your action
          token: {% raw %}${{ secrets.ACCESS_TOKEN }}{% endraw %}

```

The token is generated on [this page](https://github.com/settings/tokens){:target="_blank"}.

Once the token has been generated, copy it. Next go to your github page, select repositories > *username*.github.io > settings > secrets > actions. Then click on 'new repository secret'. Name your secret (in this case I have called it ACCESS_TOKEN), and then paste the token into the 'value' box.

The guidance refers to the creation of GITHUB_TOKEN, but Github explain one cannot create any secret values whose name uses the prefix 'github'. I called my secret item `ACCESS_TOKEN`, and referred to it in the YML file as detailed above.

### Pushing the Files
Having saved the files, I pushed them to the main branch and after about 3 minutes the site had been built.

### Conclusion
For future updates, remember **not** to make any changes directly to `gh-pages` or `master`, ensure you commit to the `main` branch.

Updated: 2022-06-01
